Title: Running a Stage Prop Using a BeagleBone Black
Date: 2013-07-05 08:40
Author: Kai Blin
Category: Tinkering
Tags: beagleboard, bonescript, brechtbautheater, nodejs
Slug: running-a-stage-prop-using-a-beaglebone-black
Status: published

As long term readers of this blog might remember, I am involved with the
theatre and [have built electronics-driven stage props
before]({filename}/geeky-stage-props-made-easy.md). However, the last time I used an
Arduino to drive an H-bridge IC for a stepper motor, so pretty much low
level electrical engineering, with a bit of Arduino coding.

This semester however, I'm involved in a play with the [Provisional
Players](http://www.provisional-players.de/), a student theatre group at
the University of TÃ¼bingen. The play is **Around the World in 80 Days**,
our own adaption of the novel by Jules Verne. And as the protagonists
are traveling around the world, their progress is tracked by moving dots
on a world map. The map is fairly large, about 2 meters wide, and we're
using about 150 LEDs to mark the red dots. Naturally, driving 150 LEDs
directly from a single microcontroller would require 150 outputs, so
that was out of the question. Phileas Fogg and Passepartout only travel
into one direction, though, so pretty soon we had the idea to use shift
registers to turn on LEDs instead. To control the shift registers, we
wanted a straightforward interface, because we'll only have one
technician handle lights, sound and the world map during the show, and
we wanted to make her life as easy as possible. The prototype set-up
that I just got to work (with a couple of days to spare, go me!) looks
like this:

-------

<div style="text-align:center" markdown="1">
[![A Beaglebone Black]({filename}/images/beagle_bone.jpg){width="60%"}]({filename}/images/beagle_bone.jpg)
</div>

--------

In the beginning of the project, it wasn't very clear how we would drive
the LEDs, so having 60 GPIO pins available sounded like a smart idea. I
decided to use a BeagleBone Black (BBB) that I had lying around after
almost demoing it at the SambaXP conference in May. As I didn't build
the circuits around the shift register, I won't dwell on that topic.
What I want to talk about a bit more is the software side of things. The
task of the system is to run LEDs that illustrate the protagonists'
travels around the world.

----------------

<div style="text-align:center" markdown="1">
[![Fogg's trip around the world]({filename}/images/Around_the_World_in_Eighty_Days_map.png)](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c4/Around_the_World_in_Eighty_Days_map.png)
Fogg's trip around the world, courtesy to Wikipedia.
</div>

----------------

The play has many, many scenes, and unfortunately the map is unlikely to
be visible from the tech booth driving it. So the interface not only
needed to allow turning on the appropriate LEDs but also provide visual
feedback to the technician driving it. Also, experience with the
software running our stage lights has told us that the "go back one
light change" feature is used more than we'd like to admit, so a "back"
button for the map would be great as well. As there's a network
connection for the BBB, I decided to go for a web interface. The BBB
already comes with some demo web pages, some of which also demo a
JavaScript library called
[bonescript](http://beagleboard.org/support/bonescript/). That was what
I wanted to use as well.

However, on closer inspection it turned out that bonescript was
originally designed as a node.js module, and running it from the browser
sometimes just didn't work right, and getting it integrated into a
website that looked the way I wanted wasn't trivial either. A look at
the bonescript page showed that the main use case seemed to be running
from the cloud9 web-based IDE that is also shipped on the BBB image. For
me, that turned out to be even less useful. Half of the time, my program
refused to start up at all, and if it did, most of the time it'd refuse
to terminate, forcing me to ssh into the BBB and killing the stray
node.js job from the command line. Clearly, that wasn't a viable
solution for our show.

But of course, bonescript being a nodejs module meant that I could
simply write a node.js webapp that would then call the appropriate
bonescript functions to trigger the hardware actions needed. And that's
just what I did. The [code is available on
GitHub](https://github.com/kblin/around-the-world) if you want to have a
look, but basically it works like this:

A node.js application is providing an http server with a bunch of
endpoints to trigger advancing the LEDs, and figuring out what travel
destinations are available. The http server also serves out the UI
files.

There's a separate module that keeps the list of destinations along with
the pin that needs to be signaled to advance the shift register, and how
many signals need to be sent per destination.
I also have a `fakebonescript` library that instead of talking to real
hardware just prints to stdout so I could develop on my laptop instead
of having to have the BBB available all the time.

On the user interface side of things, I use
[KnockoutJS](http://knockoutjs.com/) to keep track of the world map
state and handle user interface updates. KnockoutJS also comes with a
simple templating system that allows me to build the UI for the travel
destinations dynamically. For layouting, I use [Twitter's
Bootstrap](http://twitter.github.io/bootstrap/) framework. This allows
me to build a simple UI with all the required "travel", "back" and
"clear" buttons in less than 100 lines of custom HTML and JavaScript
code.

For a total of slightly under 350 lines of code I had to write myself,
I've got a BeagleBone Black running ~ 150 LEDs that light up to show the
route Phileas Fogg and his servant Passepartout travel around the world,
and the total hardware cost of the setup is less than 100 EUR if I also
count the BBB that will be reusable for other projects. I'm still amazed
myself how nice and easy it is to do really cool electronic projects
these days.
